---
title: "First Blog Post! Amazon S3 Outtage"
date: 2017-03-05
categories: [tech]
tags: [tech]
---

A few days ago, Amazon S3's us-east-1 region went down causing major sites on the internet to experience issues.
One of them ironically being Amazon's dashboard which displays the status of AWS. Every time AWS experiences an outtage,
a large chunk of the users on the internet feels the effect. There was a lot of concern and comments on this issue since
an outtage of an even larger scale happens to AWS would cripple the internet severely.

Amazon S3 is a service for storing and hosting data. Some common things that S3 gets used for is storing static assets,
for example images for their site. Sometimes, static websites are also served through S3. Something that not everyone might
not know is that the AMIs for EC2 servers are stored in S3 as well. AMIs are basically snapshots of an EC2 server used by
Amazon's ELB(Elastic Load Balancer) to fire up more servers in response to higher traffic. Without the ability to provision
more servers without the AMIs, many large sites experience slowdowns and bottlenecks.

A common sentiment many shared about this incident was that too many companies are putting their eggs in one basket and concerns about the centralized nature of
AWS. These concerns actually had me scratching my head a bit. While the concern of the internet having a single point of failure deserves some merit,
the thing with AWS is that it's not centralized at all. Amazon has datacenters all around the world in various locations. The S3 outtage only affected
the us-east-1 region, though it is the most popular region hence why so much of the internet was affected. If the websites and companies affected by
the outtage replicated the data in their S3 buckets to another region(which is a service Amazon offers for more money of course), then they would not
have been affected at all. The only "centrilization" is that it's all under the AWS umbrella and people aren't comfortable about how big that umbrella is.
It doesn't matter which company you are using to host your servers or how many diferent companies you use to host the servers. Any datacenter could go down at any time.
The way to deal with the issue is more redundancy.

So then why didn't the companies affected replicate to other regions? I'm not going to pretend I know what the companies are thinking but if I were
to make a guess, it would probably be because the cost.  If I served my personal website from S3, I wouldn't need to replicate
to another region because it's not worth it. I believe this was S3's first outtage in two years and it only lasted a few hours. This downtime is an
accepted lost since I don't need 100% uptime. Of course, I get almost no traffic on my website compared to larger companies like Imgur. However, Imgur
will still ned to factor in the cost of replicating what they have on AWS(which could be quite expensive considering their scale) versus the money they lose
from having their service interrupted. I could also have no idea what I'm talking about and their DevOps team didn't account for potential issues. One thing
I'm certain of is companies will definitely look into ways to prevent something like this from happening again in some way or another.

